A strong education system is widely viewed as being vital for developing countries. Such a system needs competent teachers at its core. The McKinsey's report titled "How the world's best-performing school systems come out on top" provides ample evidence to suggest that the quality of teachers is fundamental to the performance of students (Barber and Mourshed, 2007). Increasingly many educators and researchers agree. For example, student performance has been shown to be strongly influenced by the professionalism of teachers (Desimone, 2009; Yoon et al., 2007), as well as their international competitiveness (Wei et al., 2009). But perhaps most importantly, a school's accomplishments and the performance of its students are largely determined by how satisfied the teachers are with their job (Pepe et al., 2017).

When it comes to job satisfaction, teaching as a profession comes with great challenges (Mansfield et al., 2016). Many factors, including working conditions, status, and accomplishments, affect a teacher's actions and his or her teaching performance (Grion and Varisco, 2007). Teachers also are among professions that report the highest level of stress and dissatisfaction (Lomas et al., 2017). For example, as they progress from a support role to become more independent, novice teachers may experience several challenges (Le Maistre and Pare, 2010), such as praxis shock (Veenman, 1984), reality shock (Huberman, 1989), and transfer shock (Caspersen and Raeen, 2014). Feiman and Nemser (2012) describe this transition period "a time of intense learning" and "intense loneliness" (p. 10). Although their teaching can become much more effective after the first few years, many teachers quit before attaining that level of effectiveness, as approximately 40-50% of teachers exit the profession in the first five years (Fantilli and McDougall, 2009).

In Vietnam, education has always been one of the keystones of national development. Education accounts for nearly 20 percent of public expenditures (OECD, 2011). Many plans and reforms are being devised and implemented, aiming at a more competitive labor force. At a time when other careers offer higher salaries, clearer pathways for development, greater social prestige, and better working conditions (OECD, 2005; Ramsay, 2000), teaching seems to be less attractive than it was 30 years ago. With increasing shortage of teachers, there has been global interest in understanding what motivates people to choose teaching as a career, and what motivates them to persist in it, especially since the job has become more complex and demanding (OECD, 2005). In the context of Vietnam, there have been studies on job satisfaction (Tran and Le, 2015; Duong, 2013), albeit only at high school (Tran and Le, 2015) and university (Duong, 2013) levels. In general, though, there has been a lack of studies on education in Vietnam, especially for international access.

This paper identified and measured factors affecting job satisfaction in novice teachers, across seven Vietnamese provinces, namely Ha Giang, Nghe An, Hai Phong, Quang Nam, Gia Lai, Tay Ninh and Can Tho. It identified aspects of their jobs that novice teachers are satisfied or dissatisfied with, in relation to their reasons for choosing teaching as a career. After gaining an understanding of these factors, the researchers analyzed and suggested practices to increase novice teachers’ enthusiasm at work. Moreover, the study also provided a basis for researchers, educators, policy makers, and educational management to further study the problem of increasing work commitment and reducing turnover among teachers. To study the factors influencing novice teachers’ job satisfaction, a review of backgrounds on teaching as a career and job satisfaction follows.

1.1 Teaching as a career

The motives of teachers who select teaching as a career fall into three main categories: extrinsic (e.g., salary or lengthy holidays), intrinsic (e.g., interest, personal experience, or intellectual fulfillment), and altruistic (e.g., wanting to contribute to the growth of others) (Moran et al., 2001; Brookhart and Freeman, 1992). These motivations are highlighted as the most important reasons influencing teachers’ career choice. Other motivations include working with children and adolescents, making a social contribution, making a difference, job security, job benefits, enjoyment of teaching, compatibility with other interests and activities, compatibility with family life, and self-education (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development [OECD], 2005).

Since 1950s, several theories of career choice have been developed. One of the earliest theories is Super’s self-concept theory (1953) which draws upon the role of individuals’ perception of self in choosing a career. According to this theory, the question "Who am I?" is a determinative factor in an individual' choice of profession. Yet Gottfredson (1981) asserts that career choice is determined by two variables: sex-type rating and prestige level, meaning people choose a occupation by examining its suitability to their gender and its level of prestige.

Using both qualitative and quantitative techniques, the majority of studies base their interpretations on the traditional classification of intrinsic, extrinsic and altruistic attractors. For example, Hayes (1990) finds that in a cohort of American students becoming teachers, altruistic reasons such as making a positive difference in children's lives are more significant. Similarly, Stiegelbauer (1992) reports that for Canadian prospective teachers, the main motives for entering the profession are the need to make a difference in students' lives and in society, as well as the desire to be a role model for students. Hammond (2002), in a small-scale study involving trainee teachers, finds that these teachers frequently draw upon their own past teaching experience and their own interest to explain their career choice.

On the other hand, Kyriacou et al. (1999) place more emphasis on intrinsic reasons. In their study of Norwegian and British pre-service teachers, participants rate "enjoying teaching" and "enjoying working with children" higher than the other factors. Yet, Sinclair (2008) finds that prospective teachers are multi-motivated, as primary pre-service teachers state that the necessary qualities to be teachers and to work with children are their basic motivations besides the job being intellectually stimulating.

It is seemingly difficult to pinpoint the motivations behind teaching as a career choice. The variety in responses across studies may be caused by cultural, social, and economic differences (Kyriacou et al., 1999), as well as differences in subjects being taught. Motivations for career choice often stem from personal values and expectations, experienced in particular sociocultural settings within the context of different demand and reward structures (Watt et al., 2012) (?)

1.2. Teacher job satisfaction

Job satisfaction is considered a motivating factor, and refers to how teachers generally feel about their jobs (Skaalvik and Skaalvik, 2015; Locke, 1976). Job satisfaction influences teachers' enthusiasm, teacher-student relationships, and teacher retention (Skaalvik and Skaalvik, 2010). When teachers are motivated and have a high degree of job satisfaction, their students perform better and become more motivated, resulting in the teachers themselves being motivated by their students' success. This positive cycle often continues (Czubaj, 1996).

One of the most widely recognized theories of job satisfaction in educational settings is that of Herzberg, Mausner and Snyderman's (Dinham and Scott, 2000). Dinham and Scott (1997) argue that job satisfaction is directly connected to and is affected by different job motivators. There have also been efforts to define job satisfaction as a dependent variable explained by different factors. Kantas (2008) bases job satisfaction on the theory of human motivation by Maslow (1943) and Herzberg (1959). Maslow's hierarchy of needs theory remains valid today for understanding human behavior. According to this theory, people have five categories of needs, following a particular order.

Herzberg (1959) defines satisfiers factors and hygiene factors that affect people's attitudes toward work. Satisfiers include recognition, responsibility for one's work, personal growth, achievement and advancement, while dissatisfiers (i.e., hygiene factors) include relationships with colleagues and supervisors, pay, work conditions and security. The absence of hygiene factors can create job dissatisfaction, but their presence does not motivate or create satisfaction. Satisfiers are associated with long-term positive effects in job performance, while hygiene factors consistently produce only short-term changes in job attitudes and performance, which quickly fall back to its previous level.

Despite its wide use, Herzberg's two-factor theory has been criticized for being too dependent on a particular methodology and too restricted in its categorization of satisfiers and dissatisfiers. Vroom (1964) suggests that the principal components of job satisfaction include seven aspects, namely administration, promotion, job nature, superiors, salary remuneration, working conditions, and colleagues (Vroom, 1964). Friedlander proposes three factors: social and technical environment (e.g., superiors, interpersonal relationships, and working conditions), self-fulfillment (e.g., opportunities to exercise potentials), and recognition (e.g., challenging nature of the job, responsibilities, wages, promotions) (Evans, 1997). Yet, the influential work of Smith, Kendall, and Hulin suggest five factors: nature of the job, wage, promotions, superiors, and colleagues (Garrett, 1999). There have also been studies which consider environmental and mental factors such as the climate of the organization, its size, occupation prestige, occupation stress, personality traits and leadership behavior (Form and Geschwender, 1962; Hodson, 1985).

Several studies conclude that job satisfaction positively affects individuals and schools (Corbell et al., 2010; Høigaard et al., 2012; Malinen and Savolainen, 2016). Novice teachers who experience high levels of job satisfaction are more motivated, committed and determined to remain in the profession despite job demands (Tait, 2008). They are able to focus their attention and energy on the growth of students and their own personal growth (Lam and Yan, 2011), leading to increased productivity and improved educational outcomes (Moè et al., 2010). At the organizational level, job satisfaction leads to better interpersonal relationships among colleagues and enhanced cooperation with supervisors (Neto et al., 2017).
In contrast, novice teachers at risk of leaving the profession express strong dissatisfaction with their work environment, frustration with interpersonal relationships, and discontentment with mentoring support (Gaikhorst et al., 2014). Dissatisfied teachers become demotivated, and thus lose the ability to motivate their own students and cater to their diverse needs (Moè et al., 2010).

A few studies have examined teachers' perceptions of their jobs and career commitment, but they all use limited data. Fewer student discipline problems, good facilities, teacher induction, and professional support are correlated with high teacher morale and career commitment (?cite). Cockburn (2000) interviews a dozen primary school teachers who enjoy their jobs, and suggests that increasing teachers' involvement in curriculum innovation and inspection would improve their professional lives and career commitment. Bogler (2002) shows that teachers' occupational perceptions contribute to the separation of teachers with a high level of job satisfaction from those with a low level of job satisfaction. Weiss's (?cite) study looks only at 1st-year teachers, while Cockburn's and Weiss's do not use nationally representative data to substantiate teachers' views.

The organizational psychology literature further shows that both exogenous and endogenous factors can produce the moods and emotions related to job satisfaction. Lifestyle, disposition, sociocultural, and biological factors can all affect feelings people can experience at work. Exogenous factors are important for understanding organizational behavior. These factors are easy to identify, but how they work is difficult to understand. Workplace endogenous factors are widely studied and are grouped into several, though not necessarily exclusive, categories that may include stressful events, leaders, workgroup characteristics, physical settings, and organizational rewards and punishments (Brief and Weiss, 2002). These categories reflect several important factors that are frequently discussed in relation to teachers' feelings about their jobs: student discipline problems, school governance, professional support, compensation, and work conditions.

Because of growing concern about teacher satisfaction, Dinham and Scott (2000) initiate the Teacher 2000 Project, an international program aimed at measuring teacher motivation, satisfaction, and health to inform policy and decision-making (Dinham and Scott, 1997). This research confirms many findings by Sergiovanni (1967) and Herzberg et al. (1959), such as intrinsic factors that prove the most significant aspects in determining teacher satisfaction (Dinham and Scott, 1997). Despite this core similarity, Dinham and Scott find altruism and personal growth to be the most influential intrinsic factors, which varies slightly from Sergiovanni's findings. Other research has found that "teachers in different countries generally derive job satisfaction from factors integral to the teaching job: assisting the growth of children, developing good relationships with students, and experiencing self-growth" (Lam and Yan, 2011, p. 336), which, similar to Dinham and Scott (1997), indicates slight changes over time in the specific intrinsic factors that influence teachers. The literature consistently confirms that intrinsic factors play a central role in determining teacher job satisfaction.

While hygiene factors similar to those identified by Sergiovanni (1967) have been identified previously, the negative image of teachers in the media is a new finding that contributes to dissatisfaction (Dinham and Scott, 1997). This change may be due to shifts in the public's perception of education as well as increased governmental involvement in schools that have occurred during the thirty years between the two studies. Recent studies find that significant hygiene factors for teachers include increasing workloads, the low status that teachers hold in our society, and low salaries (Lam and Yan, 2011) as well as reduced teacher autonomy (Moore, 2012; Shann, 1998).

While the similarities in these findings are significant, there is one major difference. Dinham and Scott (1997, 2000) identify a "third factor" of variables that, unlike satisfiers and hygiene factors, may impact either teacher satisfaction or dissatisfaction. They found that: "...there was a third broad band of factors revealed by the study which previous research had not identified, this third or middle band being comprised of largely school-based factors. Falling between the universally perceived intrinsic rewards of teaching such as self-growth and pupil achievement (most satisfying), and the universal extrinsic hindrances to teacher satisfaction and effectiveness such as educational change, the status of teachers and increased administrative workloads (most dissatisfying), are school-based factors such as school leadership, climate and decision- making, school reputation, and school infrastructure, and it was these factors where most variation occurred from school to school and where there is thus greatest potential for change within schools". (Dinham and Scott, 1997, p. 16). These school-based factors differ from satisfiers because they are not intrinsic to the teacher and they differ from hygiene factors because they have the capacity to increase job satisfaction (Dinham and Scott, 1998).

These school-based factors are of critical importance in this study (?) as it focused on aspects of these less explored and more recently identified elements of teacher satisfaction. Embedded in this research is the assumption that educational leaders have the greatest ability and capacity to influence a critical school-based factor that contributes to teacher satisfaction, which is primarily "a product of leadership" (Dinham and Scott, 1997, p. 16), as compared to leaders' ability to influence intrinsic satisfiers and hygiene factors, which are primarily outside of their control. Skaalvik and Skaalvik (2011) find that supervisory support contributes to teachers' sense of belonging, which correlates with job satisfaction and a reduced motivation to leave the profession.

School working conditions can negatively influence the job satisfaction of novice teachers (Dinham and Scott, 1997; Lam and Yan, 2011; Rhodes et al., 2004). Many novice teachers are given more challenging work assignments than their veteran colleagues are (Clotfelter et al., 2005; Johnson, 2004). Kardos and Moore Johnson (2007) survey a random sample of 486 first- and second-year teachers in four states and find that while 23% of respondents indicate having fewer responsibilities than their more experienced colleagues, 36% indicate that their workload is too heavy, and 52% reported that they do not have enough time available for planning and preparation. The accessibility of resources may also influence job satisfaction as novice teachers often report that they teach classes in multiple rooms and have insufficient supplies or equipment (Johnson, 2004). Collie et al., (2012) note an association between resource access and job satisfaction. As Lam and Yan (2011) state, "when the school environment allows for teachers to focus on the core business of teaching and allows a reasonable work-life balance, teachers are more likely to become engaged in teaching" (p. 345).

In Vietnam, education has always been a cornerstone of national development, as the Vietnamese government reserves nearly 20 percent of public expenditures for education. However, in the era of globalization, there are concerns that the Vietnamese education system falls short to equip its population with necessary skills in a more competitive economy. In the Socio-Economic Development Plan (SEDP) for 2011-2015, the government emphasizes that rapid development of a skilled workforce is essential for modernization and development of a knowledge-based economy.

In 2013, the Fundamental and Comprehensive Education Reform (FCER) was adopted, which aimed for national education to meet "the requirements of industrialization, modernization, and international integration in a socialist-oriented market economy." At its core, the FCER advocates for learning that focuses more on competency of learners, rather than contents, in general education (grades K-12). It aims to improve students' cognitive and behavioral skills, critical and creative thinking, abilities to apply knowledge from multiple areas in problem solving, teamwork, and communication skills. However, the realization of such a reform depends almost exclusively on the preparedness of teachers to adopt the new pedagogical model. Indeed, one of the principles of the FCER stresses that teachers should be more professional and be ready to adapt to different, constantly changing contexts. Hence, teachers are considered the core of the reform process. Teacher training and support activities focus on greater interaction between professionals, reciprocity, hands-on mentorships, and coaching and on-time advice to teachers. (?)

Despite positive results in Vietnamese teacher education, there is a lack of high quality, responsive, and continuous onsite professional development for teachers. One of the biggest challenges is better coordination among all involving actors in teacher education to meet new demands. To address these challenges, the National Teacher Education Program (NTEP), conceived by the Ministry of Education and Training (MOET), contains a comprehensive strategy for teacher education reform. It is expected to facilitate necessary changes to meet training objectives in consideration of teachers' needs.

A significant number of studies on teachers' job satisfaction in Vietnam have been conducted, however they have not been published internationally. They are also limited in scope, for example Tran and Le (2015) concern only high school level, while Duong (2013) addresses university level. Duong (2013) reports that job satisfaction is mainly affected by institutional factors such as development aim, campus environment, leadership style, and administrational efficiency. On the other hand, Tran and Le (2015) conclude that job satisfaction in high school teachers is influenced by principal leadership and professional interest. They also provide evidences that correlate a school's environment with its teachers' efficacy, stress, and job satisfaction.

This study, in addressing the gap in research, attempted to build a body of knowledge about the Vietnamese novice teachers. In particular, the study is concerned with understanding why this particular group chooses to become teachers, and factors that affect their job satisfaction. Understanding these factors is the basis for policy planning aimed at improving teacher work commitment and minimizing turnover. It is hoped that the results and implications in this study will contribute to the existing literature, and provide guidance for school management, policy makers, and curriculum developers to improve the working environment of and the support for novice teachers.
